Title: Operational Definitions of the ARC Theory | Michael Darius Eastwood
Author: Michael Darius Eastwood
Publication date: 2026-08-22
Version: v1.9.0
Revised: 2026-10-04
OSF DOI: 10.17605/OSF.IO/GVQ82
Canonical URL: https://www.michaeldariuseastwood.com/research/papers/operational-definitions.html

Registration
------------
Theory-level predictions preregistered on OSF: DOI 10.17605/OSF.IO/P8CKQ,
registered 8 September 2026 (version 1.100), updated 13 September 2026 (version
1.102), twenty-two propositions. Companion: Operational Definitions of the ARC
Programme, version 1.7.1, 3 September 2026.Formats and the OSF recordUpdated
registration, PDFHTMLTXTMarkdownJSONCitation File FormatOSF
record10.17605/OSF.IO/P8CKQ(function(){ if(window.__edenPrereg){return;}
window.__edenPrereg=1; function card(b){return
document.getElementById(b.getAttribute("aria-controls"));} function set(b,open){
b.setAttribute("aria-expanded",open?"true":"false"); var
k=card(b);if(k){k.hidden=!open; if(open){var
p=k.offsetParent||b,r=p.getBoundingClientRect(),G=7;k.style.maxHeight="";k.style.overflowY="";var
H=k.offsetHeight,lo=0,hi=window.innerHeight,n=document.body.getElementsByTagName("*"),i,e,q,g,mid;
for(i=0;i<n.length;i++){e=n[i];if(e===k||k.contains(e)||e.contains(k)){continue;}q=window.getComputedStyle(e);if(q.position!=="fixed"&&q.position!=="sticky"){continue;}if(q.visibility==="hidden"||q.display==="none"){continue;}if((parseInt(q.zIndex,10)||0)<=5){continue;}
g=e.getBoundingClientRect();if(g.height<10||g.width<10){continue;}if(g.right<=r.left||g.left>=r.right){continue;}mid=(g.top+g.bottom)/2;if(midlo){lo=g.bottom;}}else{if(g.top<hi){hi=g.top;}}}
var rb=hi-G-(r.bottom+G),ra=(r.top-G)-(lo+G),want,cap=0;
if(H<=rb){want=r.bottom+G;}else if(H<=ra){want=r.top-G-H;} else
if(rb>=ra){want=r.bottom+G;cap=rb>40?rb:40;} else{want=lo+G;cap=ra>40?ra:40;}
k.className="eden-prereg-card";k.style.top=(want-r.top)+"px";k.style.bottom="auto";
k.style.maxHeight=cap?cap+"px":"";k.style.overflowY=cap?"auto":"";}
else{k.style.top="";k.style.bottom="";k.style.maxHeight="";k.style.overflowY="";}
} } function triggers(){return document.querySelectorAll(".eden-prereg-more");}
function shutAll(){var n=triggers(),i;for(i=0;i-1){b=t;break;} if(c.indexOf("
eden-prereg-card ")>-1){inside=true;break;} t=t.parentNode; } if(b){var
was=b.getAttribute("aria-expanded")==="true";shutAll();set(b,!was);return;}
if(!inside){shutAll();} }); document.addEventListener("keydown",function(e){
if(e.key!=="Escape"&&e.keyCode!==27){return;} var n=triggers(),i;
for(i=0;i<n.length;i++){
if(n[i].getAttribute("aria-expanded")==="true"){set(n[i],false);n[i].focus();} }
}); })();

Abstract
--------
This document fixes what each symbol in the ARC Theory's equations means and how
it would be measured. It ranks the twenty-one equations the programme relies
upon for Laws I to III by how much depends on each, from the ARC Equation of Law
I, U = I x R^alpha, through Law II's criterion, beta_C > k, and Law III's
ceiling, alpha_crit = 1 / (1 - gamma), to the statistical methods the
experiments use. It defines thirty-eight symbols in plain words, pairs each with
the measurement that would produce it, names the nine letters the corpus uses
for more than one quantity, and records the seven forms the programme has
retracted, with the reason each was wrong. It reports no result and asserts no
value: every figure it quotes is carried from the paper that measured it. The
theory has five laws. Laws I to III were registered on 8 September 2026; Laws IV
and V, the ARC Persistence Law and the ARC Embedding Law, were added on 24
September 2026, their propositions registered and neither law yet registered as
a law or tested. Their notation is fixed in section 1 of their mathematics,
version 1.0 (3 October 2026), and joins this document at its next version.

Full text
---------
The source of truth for the ARC Theory's notation: every equation the programme
relies upon for Laws I to III, ranked by how much depends on it, each symbol
defined and paired with its measurement; the notation of Laws IV and V is fixed
in their mathematics until it joins.

How to read this

An exponent is a growth-shape number, not a size. It answers: when I double the
effort, what happens to the result? An exponent of 1 means the result doubles
too. An exponent of 2 means it quadruples. An exponent below 1 means you get
less than double, which is the shape of diminishing returns. Every claim in this
programme is a claim about the value of one of these shape numbers, so every
argument turns on measuring one correctly.

The one rule. A symbol means what this file says it means, and nothing else.
Where the same letter is used for two different quantities anywhere in the
corpus, that letter appears in the collisions list below, and both readings are
named. If you meet a symbol in a paper and cannot find it here, that is a defect
in the paper, not in your reading.

What the word law is doing here. The theory's five laws are named conjectures.
Laws I to III were registered on 8 September 2026; Laws IV and V were added on
24 September 2026, their propositions registered and neither law yet registered
as a law or tested. Each law states a relation held open to measurement; none is
established, and the status line under every equation says which of definition,
derivation, criterion, modelling choice or open measurement it is. Naming a
conjecture is how it becomes arguable, not how it becomes true.

The equations, ranked

Ranked by how much fails if the equation is wrong, not by how often it appears.
The first four are the programme; the rest support them. The third column is the
ranking rationale, so the order can be argued with rather than taken on trust.
Everything else about each equation, what it says in plain words, what it is
for, every symbol with its measurement, and what would refute it, is in its own
section below and is not repeated here.

Row 1
  #: 1
  Equation: U = I x R^alpha The ARC Equation
  Why it ranks here: what fails if it is wrong: Nothing else in the programme
    survives. This is the frame, not a result.

Row 2
  #: 2
  Equation: beta_C > k The ARC Co-Scaling criterion
  Why it ranks here: what fails if it is wrong: The safety claim dies, and EQ-02
    loses its operational meaning again, because the word stable in the ARC
    Bound is defined by this criterion.

Row 3
  #: 3
  Equation: alpha_crit = 1 / (1 - gamma) The ARC Ceiling
  Why it ranks here: what fails if it is wrong: The value two loses its support,
    though the law itself is separable: a different measured gamma yields a
    different ceiling and the structure stands.

Row 4
  #: 4
  Equation: alpha <= 2 The ARC Bound
  Why it ranks here: what fails if it is wrong: The headline claim dies. The
    framework survives, because EQ-01 and EQ-04 do not depend on the value two.

Row 5
  #: 5
  Equation: B(R) / A_c(R) ~ R^[alpha(1 - gamma) - 1] The burden-to-capacity
    ratio
  Why it ranks here: what fails if it is wrong: The ceiling loses its derivation
    and the value two loses its support.

Row 6
  #: 6
  Equation: alpha = d / (d + 1), d = 2 / (1 + 3w) The dimensional derivation
  Why it ranks here: what fails if it is wrong: The cross-domain derivation
    dies; the empirical programme is untouched.

Row 7
  #: 7
  Equation: f(xy) = f(x) * f(y) Cauchy's multiplicative functional equation
  Why it ranks here: what fails if it is wrong: The claim that a power law is
    forced rather than fitted collapses.

Row 8
  #: 8
  Equation: alpha = ln(E1 / E2) / ln(R2 / R1) The slope estimator
  Why it ranks here: what fails if it is wrong: Every measured number in the
    programme is wrong, including the retraction. Operationally this is the most
    important equation here, whatever its rank as a law.

Row 9
  #: 9
  Equation: resample with replacement, refit, take the 2.5th and 97.5th
    percentiles The bootstrap confidence interval
  Why it ranks here: what fails if it is wrong: Every stated interval is wrong,
    including the one that withdrew 2.24.

Row 10
  #: 10
  Equation: E ~ R^(-1/2), that is alpha = 0.5 The zero-parameter null
  Why it ranks here: what fails if it is wrong: Nothing of the framework falls.
    If it is RIGHT, the compounding reading of the measurement is unnecessary.

Row 11
  #: 11
  Equation: P(H | E) = P(E | H) * P(H) / P(E) Bayes' theorem
  Why it ranks here: what fails if it is wrong: Nothing. It is a theorem.

Row 12
  #: 12
  Equation: d = (mean1 - mean2) / standard deviation Cohen's d
  Why it ranks here: what fails if it is wrong: Nothing. It is a definition.

Row 13
  #: 13
  Equation: X^2 = -2 * sum(ln p_i), with 2k degrees of freedom Fisher's method
    for combining p-values
  Why it ranks here: what fails if it is wrong: The combined figure falls; the
    individual results are untouched.

Row 14
  #: 14
  Equation: alpha = 1 / (1 - beta_L) The self-reference theorem
  Why it ranks here: what fails if it is wrong: Alpha becomes a fitted parameter
    with no derivation, and the programme becomes curve-fitting.

Row 15
  #: 15
  Equation: dg/dr = a * g^(beta_L) The growth equation
  Why it ranks here: what fails if it is wrong: EQ-05 loses its derivation.

Row 16
  #: 16
  Equation: E(R) = E0 * R^(-alpha) Error decay
  Why it ranks here: what fails if it is wrong: The link between the frame and
    the data breaks.

Row 17
  #: 17
  Equation: A(C) = A_max * C^beta_H / (C^beta_H + Cs^beta_H) The saturation
    curve
  Why it ranks here: what fails if it is wrong: The saturating treatment in
    Paper X loses its functional form.

Row 18
  #: 18
  Equation: A(R) = A0 * R^beta_A Alignment scaling
  Why it ranks here: what fails if it is wrong: Paper II's alignment-side
    scaling claim dies.

Row 19
  #: 19
  Equation: k = delta - 1/alpha The self-acceleration exponent
  Why it ranks here: what fails if it is wrong: The drift term in EQ-04 loses
    its derivation and must be measured directly.

Row 20
  #: 20
  Equation: beta_X = (1 - beta_L) / (1 - beta_L_prime) The boundary gap
  Why it ranks here: what fails if it is wrong: Paper XIII's cross-system
    comparison loses its measure.

Row 21
  #: 21
  Equation: P/M = M^(3/4) / M = M^(-1/4) The metabolic analogy
  Why it ranks here: what fails if it is wrong: An analogy is lost. No claim
    depends on it.

Each one, explained

Each symbol is defined in full at its first appearance, in rank order, and later
equations point back to that definition rather than repeating it. A definition
restated four times reads as padding and gives a reader four chances to meet a
version that has drifted.

1 The ARC Equation Law I, the ARC Principle

In words. A system's usable capability equals what it starts with, multiplied by
how deeply it can improve itself, raised to a power.

U = I x R^alpha

What it is for. It is the definition that makes the rest measurable. It does not
assert a value; it says which number to go and measure. Every other equation
here is a statement about alpha.

Worked. Capability here is a latent, ratio-scaled measure with no ceiling, like
the level a system reaches on a calibrated difficulty ladder, never a bounded
percentage score: a score capped at 100 cannot follow this arithmetic, which is
why the programme's own instruments measure on the ladder scale, after a bounded
percentage score was found running through unbounded arithmetic and the worked
example was recast on 27 August 2026. Suppose a system sits at capability U = 40
on such a ladder at one pass, so I = 40. Allow it 16 passes, so R = 16. If alpha
= 0, looping is worthless: 16^0 = 1, so U = 40, no gain. If alpha = 0.5, 16^0.5
= 4, so U = 160. If alpha = 1, 16^1 = 16, so U = 640. If alpha = 2, 16^2 = 256,
so U = 10,240, and each loop makes the next more productive. That is the whole
argument in four lines, and the question is which of those worlds we are in. The
honest answer so far is the first or second.

Measured as. Varied: recursive depth R, counted on a configuration ladder fixed
in advance. Read out: usable capability U, scored on a target battery frozen
before the first measurement. Held fixed: the battery, the ladder and the
scoring instrument, for the whole run.

U usable capability

What the system can actually do, after everything is accounted for. The output
side of the equation. How it is measured. Score on a fixed target battery held
constant across the whole experiment. The battery must be frozen before any
measurement, because a battery that changes during a run makes the exponent
meaningless. Domain. positive Units. battery score, dimensionless once
normalised

I base intelligence

What the system could do before any self-improvement. The starting point. How it
is measured. The same battery score measured at recursion depth one, before any
improvement pass is applied. Domain. positive Units. same as U

R recursive depth

How many times the system has been through its own improvement loop. If it
reviews and revises its own work three times, R is three. How it is measured.
Count of completed improvement passes under a fixed configuration ladder. Must
be counted, never estimated, and the ladder fixed in advance. Domain. integer,
at least one Units. dimensionless count

α (alpha) the capability-growth exponent

The growth-shape number. It says what happens to capability when you double the
recursive depth. At alpha = 1 capability doubles. At alpha = 2 it quadruples.
Below 1 you get diminishing returns. How it is measured. The slope of a straight
line fitted to capability against recursive depth when both are plotted on
logarithmic axes. In practice, EQ-07 applied across the measured range, with the
interval reported always. EQ-07 is written on the error side, so using it for
alpha assumes the error-decay exponent is this same alpha. Whether it is has
never been stated anywhere in the corpus, and it is an open collision: see alpha
in the error-decay equation, below. Domain. unbounded in principle; claimed at
most two for systems that hold together

Status. definitional; the exponent is open to measurement, and the measured
value is currently 0.49 with interval [-1.3, 2.9], which distinguishes nothing

Relied upon in: foundational, executive-summary, paper-i-arc-principle,
paper-c-pnp.

2 The ARC Co-Scaling criterion Law II, the ARC Co-Scaling Law

In words. A system stays aligned with itself only while its power to correct
grows faster than its tendency to drift.

beta_C > k

What it is for. The safety criterion, and since 22 August 2026 also the meter
that makes EQ-02 falsifiable: stability is no longer asserted, it is measured as
correction out-scaling drift.

Worked. A system doubles in capability. Its correction capacity rises 30 per
cent, so beta_C is about 0.38. Its drift rises 20 per cent, so k is about 0.26.
Since 0.38 > 0.26 correction is pulling ahead and the off-target fraction
shrinks as it grows. Reverse the two and the same system grows more capable
while getting harder to keep on target. Read the comparison, never either number
alone: beta_C = 0.9 with k = 1.1 is unstable despite far stronger correction.

Read this before using it. The beta in this criterion is NOT the beta in EQ-05.
See collisions.

Measured as. Varied: recursive depth. Read out: the two exponents beta_C and k,
each as a log-log slope from the same estimator that yields alpha. Held fixed:
the drift and correction instruments, so that the two slopes are commensurable.
The criterion is the comparison of the two, not a quantity fitted in its own
right.

β_C (beta_C) the correction exponent

How fast the brakes strengthen. The rate at which a system's power to correct
itself grows as it gets more capable. How it is measured. Log-log slope of
corrective strength against capability, from the same estimator as alpha, EQ-07.
Domain. real

k the drift-acceleration exponent

How fast the engine speeds up. The rate at which a system's tendency to drift
away from its target accelerates as it improves itself. How it is measured.
Log-log slope of drift against capability, same estimator; or derived from cost
scaling through EQ-11. Domain. real; negative values mean drift decelerates

Status. criterion; both exponents estimable from the same log-log slope
estimator that yields alpha, which is why one instrument serves both laws

Relied upon in: hrih-paper, paper-x-coupled-coscaling.

3 The ARC Ceiling Law III, the ARC Ceiling

In words. The ceiling on the growth-shape number is one divided by the
correction shortfall, where the shortfall is how far the correction-leverage
number falls short of one.

alpha_crit = 1 / (1 - gamma)

What it is for. It is where the number two comes from. Feed it one assumption,
that gamma is one half, and it returns two. Change the assumption and the
ceiling moves with it.

Conditional on class. The ceiling this returns is conditional on the corrector's
class, because its only input is the leverage exponent and that exponent is
class-dependent. Feed it the same-class cap of one half and it returns two. Feed
it a cross-class exponent above one half and it returns more than two. The
equation is unchanged either way; what changes is which system you are asking
about.

Worked. The equation is a reciprocal, so the smaller the shortfall the higher
the ceiling. gamma = 0.3 gives a shortfall of 0.7 and a ceiling of 1.43. gamma =
0.5 gives 0.5 and exactly 2.00. gamma = 0.8 gives 0.2 and 5.00. gamma = 0.9
gives 0.1 and 10.00. Read the middle row: a corrector scaling as the square root
of capability gives a ceiling of exactly two. That is where the famous number
comes from, as an output under one assumption, not a discovery.

Read this before using it. The retracted form 1/gamma and this corrected form
return the same answer, two, at exactly gamma = one half. That single point of
agreement is the programme's headline number, which is why the wrong form
survived undetected on the glossary page for six days. Below one half the two
forms move in opposite directions: the retracted form makes a WORSE corrector
raise the ceiling, which inverts a bound into a floor.

Measured as. Not measured directly. Both sides are estimated separately, the
correction-leverage exponent from correction accumulation and alpha from EQ-07,
and the relation is tested by comparing the two estimates rather than by fitting
it.

α_crit (alpha_crit) the stability ceiling

The highest growth-shape number a system can have and still hold itself
together. How it is measured. Not measured directly. Computed from gamma through
EQ-03. To test it you measure gamma, not the ceiling. Domain. at least one

γ (gamma) the correction-leverage exponent

How much good it does to correct yourself. It measures how effectively internal
correction converts accumulated capability into actual improvement. Higher is
better. Written chi from the working paper of 16 August 2026 onward, because
gamma had carried three incompatible readings; the theory registration still
says gamma and the two are the same quantity. Use chi in any new writing and
gamma only when quoting the registration. How it is measured. The per-family
slope of misalignment removed per review pass against checker capability, under
a blinded scoring instrument, with the target battery held fixed. Drafted as
study-ad; never measured on any real system. Domain. assumed at most one half
for SAME-CLASS correctors, under the independence premise. Not a universal cap:
it is a cap on that class Class dependence. The cap is a property of the
corrector's CLASS, not of correction as such. A corrector sharing the system's
substrate cannot be anti-correlated with itself, which is where the one half
comes from. A corrector from a different class is not bound by it and may exceed
it. Build order is a lever on class: as the field currently builds, a corrector
added after training on the vast corpus is drawn from that corpus and is close
to maximally same-class, whereas one built and validated first on a separate
curated corpus has the opportunity to differ. Opportunity rather than guarantee:
a curated corpus drawn from the same distribution would separate nothing. What
this rests on. The value one half is a conjecture and not a derivation. It rests
on the premise that internally accumulated corrections combine like independent
samples. This is the single undefended assumption on which the ceiling at two
rests, and it is deliberately left open.

χ (chi) the correction-service elasticity in capability

How much more correction a system can deliver when it becomes more capable. How
it is measured. The elasticity of correction service with respect to capability.
This is the same quantity the theory registration calls the correction-leverage
exponent gamma; chi is the name used from the working paper of 16 August 2026
onward, because gamma had carried three incompatible readings. Not identifiable
from a single path: needs crossed or off-path variation. Domain. 0 to below 1
for a finite ceiling

Status. corrected 16 August 2026; see retracted_forms

Relied upon in: foundational, executive-summary.

4 The ARC Bound the same-class instance of Law III, the ARC Ceiling, at gamma equal to one half

In words. The growth-shape number cannot exceed two and still describe a system
that holds itself together.

alpha <= 2

What it is for. The programme's headline claim. Not an impossibility claim: the
region above two is enterable, but not correctable.

What it is a bound of. The ARC Bound is the SAME-CLASS bound. It was never
universal, because its derivation runs through a leverage cap that this estate
has always stated as a same-class cap, but until 22 August 2026 no surface a
reader would meet said so. A cross-class system measured above two therefore
does not refute it; it tests the build-order prediction instead. The kill
condition now requires the corrector's class to be declared and evidenced before
the run, on the same footing as the measurement window, because otherwise the
assertion that a corrector was cross-class becomes a fresh escape of exactly the
shape that the metering of the same day closed.

Not a separate law. The ARC Bound is the ARC Ceiling's output under one
assumption, not a law of its own. The famous two is this equation's answer,
never its input. Ranked fourth for that reason, below the equation that produces
it.

Measured as. Not measured directly. It is a threshold on alpha, so it is tested
by measuring alpha through EQ-07 and asking whether the estimate and its
interval sit at or below two.

α (alpha) the capability-growth exponent

Defined in full at EQ-01, its first use.

Status. conditional under one stated assumption still on trial, that same-class
correctors accumulate corrections the way independent samples do; refutable
since 22 August 2026, when all four terms of its kill condition were metered:
the exponent by its interval excluding two rather than its point estimate, the
window by prior declaration, the system by a genuine self-referential loop, and
stability by the ARC Co-Scaling Law's condition

Relied upon in: foundational, executive-summary.

5 The burden-to-capacity ratio the derivation behind Law III

In words. Compare how fast a system's need for correction is growing against how
fast its ability to correct is growing. Whether that gap opens or closes decides
everything.

B(R) / A_c(R) ~ R^[alpha(1 - gamma) - 1]

What it is for. This is where the ceiling actually comes from. The ceiling
equation is its consequence, not its premise.

Worked. Everything hinges on the sign of alpha(1 - gamma) - 1. Negative, when
alpha is below the ceiling: the ratio shrinks, the corrector catches up, stable.
Positive: the ratio grows without limit, uncorrected error piles up, unstable.
Exactly zero: the exponents tie and equality is NOT automatically safe, because
the outcome then turns on coefficients, delays, starting conditions and
saturation, none of which the exponent captures. Set it to zero and solve and
you get the ceiling law: that is where Law III comes from.

What would prove it wrong. Its premise, that correction burden tracks the
capability a system is ADDING. If burden instead tracks the capability it
already HAS, the growth exponent cancels out of the stability condition entirely
and no ceiling on growth survives at all. Law II would survive; Law III would
not.

Read this before using it. The capacity term is written A_c here, not a bare A.
The papers write it as A, which already means alignment elsewhere in this
corpus. Reusing the bare letter while auditing letter reuse would have been the
same mistake in a new place, so the subscript is introduced here and the papers
should adopt it.

Measured as. Not measured directly. What matters is the sign of the exponent,
and that is read off two separately estimated quantities, alpha from EQ-07 and
the correction-leverage exponent from correction accumulation. The exactly-zero
case is not automatically safe and is reported rather than rounded away.

B correction burden

How much correcting a system needs. It grows as the system does more, because
more capability means more that can go wrong. How it is measured. Volume of
correction required per unit of capability added, measured over the same fixed
battery used for capability. Domain. non-negative Units. correction units,
dimensionless once normalised

A_c correction capacity

How much correcting a system can actually do. The other side of the burden. How
it is measured. Correction delivered per pass at a given capability, from the
same blinded instrument that supplies the correction exponent. Domain. positive
Units. same as burden, so the ratio is dimensionless

R recursive depth

Defined in full at EQ-01, its first use.

α (alpha) the capability-growth exponent

Defined in full at EQ-01, its first use.

γ (gamma) the correction-leverage exponent

Defined in full at EQ-03, its first use.

Status. derivation; the premise is stated and is the single point of attack

Relied upon in: foundational.

6 The dimensional derivation

In words. The growth-shape number equals the effective dimension divided by that
dimension plus one, and the dimension itself follows from an equation-of-state
parameter.

alpha = d / (d + 1), d = 2 / (1 + 3w)

What it is for. The route by which the framework connects to a physical
derivation rather than a fitted one.

Measured as. Not measured on any system. d and w enter from the physical
derivation as a consistency route, not as fitted quantities.

α (alpha) the capability-growth exponent

Defined in full at EQ-01, its first use.

d effective dimension and equation-of-state parameter

w effective dimension and equation-of-state parameter

In the dimensional derivation, d is the effective number of directions the
system can grow in, and w is the parameter that fixes it. How it is measured.
Not measured on any AI system. These come from the physical derivation and enter
the framework as a consistency route, not as fitted quantities. Domain. d
positive

Status. derivation within stated assumptions

Relied upon in: on-the-origin-of-scaling-laws.

7 Cauchy's multiplicative functional equation

In words. If doubling the input always multiplies the output by the same factor
no matter where you started, the relationship can only be a power law and
nothing else fits.

f(xy) = f(x) * f(y)

What it is for. The argument that scaling laws must be power laws rather than
merely happen to look like them.

What would prove it wrong. A continuous function satisfying the equation that is
not a power law. Mathematically foreclosed under the stated regularity
conditions, which is why the empirical route matters more: real domains that
violate the classification.

Measured as. Not measured. It is a classical result, and what has to be checked
in each application is whether the regularity conditions hold over the domain
claimed.

f the unknown function and its arguments, in Cauchy's equation

x the unknown function and its arguments, in Cauchy's equation

y the unknown function and its arguments, in Cauchy's equation

A rule you do not yet know, and two numbers you feed it. The equation asks which
rules turn multiplication of the inputs into multiplication of the outputs;
power laws are the answer. How it is measured. Standard mathematical notation
for the multiplicative functional equation. Domain. positive reals in the form
used here

Status. classical result; the content is in whether the regularity conditions
hold in the domains claimed

Relied upon in: paper-vii-cauchy-unification.

8 The slope estimator the measurement recipe

In words. To find the growth-shape number from data, take two measurements,
divide one error by the other, take the logarithm, and divide by the logarithm
of the ratio of the two depths.

alpha = ln(E1 / E2) / ln(R2 / R1)

What it is for. This is the only equation in the programme that touches data.
Every measured exponent anywhere in the corpus, including the retracted 2.24 and
the corrected 0.49, came out of this estimator or its regression form.

Worked. A power law curves on ordinary axes and straightens under logarithms:
log U = log I + alpha x log R, which is a straight line y = c + mx whose slope
IS alpha. A logarithm answers how many times you multiply by ten to reach a
number, so equal steps on the axis are equal multiplications and a
multiplicative relationship becomes a line. What goes wrong: a slope fitted
across a factor of two in R is nearly meaningless, slopes need about a decade to
be trustworthy; curvature fitted as a slope still returns a number that means
nothing; and a high r-squared says the points sit near the line, never that the
line is the right model.

Read this before using it. The corpus writes this two ways: with a leading minus
and the error ratio inverted, and without. They are the same estimator. A reader
meeting both may reasonably think they are different equations; they are not.

Measured as. Varied: recursive depth, at two checkpoints R1 and R2 chosen before
the run. Read out: error E1 and E2 at those two depths, from which the slope is
computed. Held fixed: the error instrument and the ladder, because a slope taken
between two differently measured points is not a slope.

α (alpha) the capability-growth exponent

Defined in full at EQ-01, its first use.

E error

How wrong the system is. The thing that is supposed to fall as it improves. How
it is measured. Error rate on the frozen target battery. Must be the same
battery at every depth. Domain. non-negative Units. error rate, dimensionless

R recursive depth

Defined in full at EQ-01, its first use.

E₁ (E1) the two measurement points

E₂ (E2) the two measurement points

R₁ (R1) the two measurement points

R₂ (R2) the two measurement points

The pair of readings the slope is worked out from: error at each of two depths,
and the two depths themselves. Two points make a line. How it is measured. Error
and recursive depth at the earlier and later of the two checkpoints entering the
slope estimator. Domain. positive Units. E as error; R as depth

Status. standard log-log slope; the same estimator supplies beta_C and k in
EQ-04, which is what lets one instrument meter both laws

Relied upon in: paper-ii-experimental-validation,
paper-iii-alignment-scaling-problem.

9 The bootstrap confidence interval

In words. Rather than trusting one estimate, rebuild the dataset thousands of
times by resampling it, and see how much the answer moves.

resample with replacement, refit, take the 2.5th and 97.5th percentiles

What it is for. Every claim of significance in the programme. It is what
produced the [-1.3, 2.9] interval that the point estimate must never be printed
without.

What would prove it wrong. Nothing about the method. It is MISUSED by resampling
data that are not independent, for instance repeated runs of one model treated
as separate observations, which makes the interval look narrower than the truth.

Measured as. Not measured; it is the procedure that puts an interval on
something else that was. Varied: the resample. Read out: the 2.5th and 97.5th
percentiles of the refitted estimate. Held fixed: the dataset, the fitting
procedure and the number of resamples, all declared before the first resample is
drawn.

This equation carries no symbol. It is a procedure stated in words, so an empty
symbol list here is a fact about the method and not an omission in the register.

Status. standard method; the risk is application, not theory

Relied upon in: paper-ii-experimental-validation.

10 The zero-parameter null

In words. If each pass of reasoning is just an independent noisy attempt and
errors average out, then plain statistics predicts an exponent of one half with
no theory at all.

E ~ R^(-1/2), that is alpha = 0.5

What it is for. It is the null this programme raised against ITSELF, and it is
the most dangerous equation in the register. The programme's own corrected
headline measurement is 0.49. That sits almost exactly on what averaging
predicts with no framework at all.

Worked. Where the one half comes from, with no theory at all: the central limit
theorem. Average n independent noisy attempts and the error shrinks in
proportion to the square root of n, so the predicted exponent is 0.5 with no
compounding, no leverage and no framework. The programme's own corrected
measurement is 0.49. A measurement equally consistent with the framework and
with plain averaging does not support either; it shows the measurement cannot
tell them apart. Raised by this programme against itself, 8 August 2026,
published 15 August.

What would prove it wrong. This condition fires AGAINST the framework, not for
it. It fires, and the compounding reading is withdrawn, if a test built in
advance to separate the two returns the null's prediction rather than a stated
deviation from 0.5. It is retired only when such a test returns a deviation the
framework predicted.

Measured as. Not measured; it is the null that a measurement is scored against.
It fixes alpha at one half with no fitted parameter, so a measured alpha is
compared with one half rather than with zero.

E error

Defined in full at EQ-07, its first use.

R recursive depth

Defined in full at EQ-01, its first use.

α (alpha) the capability-growth exponent

Defined in full at EQ-01, its first use.

Status. open and adverse; raised by this programme against its own headline
number

Relied upon in: paper-ii-experimental-validation.

11 Bayes' theorem

In words. Start with how likely you thought something was, look at the new
evidence, and adjust in proportion to how much better that evidence is explained
by your idea being true than by it being false.

P(H | E) = P(E | H) * P(H) / P(E)

What it is for. All reasoning in the programme about priors and about what
evidence would change them.

Worked. Worked, because this is the one people nod at without following. Suppose
before any data you think there is a 30 per cent chance the correction exponent
is one half, so P(H) = 0.3. A measurement arrives that would appear 80 per cent
of the time if H is true and 20 per cent of the time if it is false. How often
would you see it at all: P(E) = (0.8 x 0.3) + (0.2 x 0.7) = 0.24 + 0.14 = 0.38.
Then P(H|E) = 0.8 x 0.3 / 0.38 = 0.63. Belief moves from 30 per cent to 63 per
cent. Notice it did not jump to certainty: the evidence multiplied the odds by
four, from 3 to 7 up to 12 to 7, which moved the probability from 30 per cent
only to 63 per cent, and odds and probability must never be quoted as though
they were the same movement. That restraint is the point of using the rule
rather than reasoning by impression. Operationalised here three ways: dated
priors recorded in writing BEFORE any confirmatory data, with what would change
them; kill conditions, which are commitments about P(E|H) written in advance,
which is why the window must be declared before the run; and the reason
consistent-with is not supports, because when P(E|H) and P(E|not H) are about
equal the ratio is about one and the posterior barely moves from the prior.

What would prove it wrong. Nothing. It is provable from the definition of
conditional probability, not an empirical claim. What can be wrong is its
APPLICATION: priors chosen after the fact, likelihoods guessed to suit, or a
claim of updating without recording what the prior was.

Measured as. Not measured. It is the rule by which a measurement moves a stated
prior, and the discipline is that the prior is recorded before the evidence is
seen.

H hypothesis and evidence, in Bayes' theorem

H is the claim being tested. E is what you observed. Bayes' theorem says how
much the observation should move your confidence in the claim. How it is
measured. Standard statistical notation, not a quantity of this programme.
Included so the equation can be read without another reference. Domain.
probabilities lie between zero and one

Also printed above, and defined elsewhere in this register: P in the P
collision, which names the Bayes reading and the metabolic one, E in the E
collision, and the H entry, which defines the evidence reading.

Status. theorem; the discipline is in recording the prior before the evidence

12 Cohen's d

In words. How far apart two groups are, measured in units of how spread out the
data already is, so a difference can be called large or small without knowing
what was measured.

d = (mean1 - mean2) / standard deviation

What it is for. How big any measured difference in the programme actually is.

Worked. Conventionally about 0.2 is small, 0.5 moderate, 0.8 large, and the sign
gives direction. A d of -0.53 means the first group scored lower by rather more
than half a standard deviation. Dividing by the spread is what makes it
portable: a 5-point gap is enormous if scores usually vary by 2 and trivial if
they usually vary by 50.

What would prove it wrong. Nothing about the formula. It is MISAPPLIED when the
two groups have very different spreads, so dividing by one shared standard
deviation flatters or buries the difference, and when it is reported without the
sample size that says how reliable it is.

Read this before using it. This d is not the programme's dimensional d. It
belongs to statistics and must never be renamed; only the programme's own uses
can take subscripts.

Measured as. Varied: group membership. Read out: the difference between the two
group means. Held fixed: the measured quantity and its standard deviation, which
is the unit the difference is expressed in.

mean₁ (mean1) the two group averages, in Cohen's d

mean₂ (mean2) the two group averages, in Cohen's d

The average of each of the two groups being compared, before the difference
between them is expressed in standard deviations. How it is measured. Standard
statistical notation, not a quantity of this programme. Domain. unbounded Units.
as for the measured quantity

Also printed above, and defined elsewhere in this register: d in the d
collision, which names the effect-size reading.

Status. standard statistic

13 Fisher's method for combining p-values

In words. A way of pooling several separate weak results into one overall
figure, which only works if the results were genuinely independent of one
another.

X^2 = -2 * sum(ln p_i), with 2k degrees of freedom

What it is for. One published combined figure, since withdrawn.

What would prove it wrong. Nothing about the method. The live question is
whether the independence condition holds, and here it does not, which is why the
combined figure was withdrawn rather than defended.

Measured as. Withdrawn in application, so nothing is currently measured with it.
Read out: a combined statistic pooled from k separately reported p-values. Held
fixed: the requirement that the pooled results be genuinely independent, which
was never established here.

X² (X) the combined test statistic and its inputs

p_i the combined test statistic and its inputs

A way of pooling several separate tests into one verdict, and the individual
results being pooled. How it is measured. Standard statistical notation for
Fisher's method, not a quantity of this programme. Included so the equation can
be read without another reference. Domain. p between zero and one

Also printed above, and defined elsewhere in this register: k in the k
collision, which names the pooled-p-value reading.

Status. withdrawn in application; independence was never established

14 The self-reference theorem Foundational paper, Theorem 2

In words. If a system's rate of improvement depends on how good it already is,
raised to some power, then its capability grows as a power law whose exponent is
one over the shortfall of that power from one.

alpha = 1 / (1 - beta_L)

What it is for. It is where alpha comes from mechanically rather than by
fitting. It converts a statement about self-reference into a measurable
exponent.

Read this before using it. This equation and EQ-03 share the shape
one-over-one-minus-something. They are different laws with different arguments.
Recognising the shape is not recognising the law.

Measured as. Not measured. It is a proof within stated assumptions, and its
inputs are measured elsewhere: beta_L from EQ-06 and alpha from EQ-07.

α (alpha) the capability-growth exponent

Defined in full at EQ-01, its first use.

β_L (beta_L) the self-referential coupling

How strongly a system's rate of improvement depends on how good it already is.
At zero, improvement is constant regardless of skill. Near one, the better it
gets the faster it gets better, and growth runs away. How it is measured. Fitted
from the growth equation EQ-06 over the measured range, then checked against
alpha through EQ-05 as an independent consistency test. That check is an
unexploited falsifier: measure beta_L, predict alpha, compare with the fitted
alpha. Domain. less than one for finite growth

Status. proved within stated assumptions; not independently reviewed

Relied upon in: foundational, on-the-origin-of-scaling-laws,
paper-ii-experimental-validation, paper-xiii-self-acceleration-exponent.

15 The growth equation the differential equation generating EQ-05

In words. The rate at which capability improves per unit of recursive depth is
proportional to current capability raised to the coupling power.

dg/dr = a * g^(beta_L)

What it is for. The mechanism. Solve it and EQ-05 falls out. It is the only
place the self-reference is actually stated as a process rather than a result.

Measured as. Varied: recursive depth r. Read out: the rate of change of
capability g with depth. Held fixed: the configuration ladder and the scoring
instrument, because beta_L is claimed constant only over the range studied and a
changed instrument would hide that.

g growth variables of the differential equation

r growth variables of the differential equation

a growth variables of the differential equation

In the growth equation, g is current capability, r is depth, and a is a constant
of proportionality that sets the pace but not the shape. How it is measured. g
and r as for U and R. The constant a is fitted and carries no claim: it moves
the curve up or down without changing the exponent, which is what the programme
is about. Domain. positive Units. as for U and R; a carries the units that
balance the equation

β_L (beta_L) the self-referential coupling

Defined in full at EQ-05, its first use.

Status. standard separable ODE; the content is in the claim that beta_L is
constant over the range studied

Relied upon in: paper-iii-alignment-scaling-problem,
paper-ix-synthesis-and-roadmap, paper-xiii-self-acceleration-exponent.

16 Error decay

In words. Error falls away as recursive depth rises, as a power of that depth.

E(R) = E0 * R^(-alpha)

What it is for. The measured face of EQ-01. What EQ-07 is fitted to.

Read this before using it. The corpus writes the exponent here as both alpha and
alpha_align. If they are the same quantity, one symbol should be used; if they
are different, the difference has never been stated. Open notation defect,
logged in collisions.

Measured as. Varied: recursive depth R. Read out: error E. Held fixed: the error
instrument, and the starting value E0, which is the first measured point of the
series being fitted rather than a free parameter.

E error

Defined in full at EQ-07, its first use.

E₀ (E0) the starting values

Where alignment and error stood before the growth being described began. Every
power law needs a starting point, and this is it. How it is measured. The value
of alignment, and of error, at the first measured point of the series being
fitted. Domain. positive Units. as for the quantity each scales

R recursive depth

Defined in full at EQ-01, its first use.

α (alpha) the capability-growth exponent

Defined in full at EQ-01, its first use.

Status. measured form

Relied upon in: paper-ii-experimental-validation,
paper-iii-alignment-scaling-problem.

17 The saturation curve

In words. Alignment rises with capability but flattens towards a maximum, with
the steepness set by an exponent.

A(C) = A_max * C^beta_H / (C^beta_H + Cs^beta_H)

What it is for. Models alignment that cannot exceed a ceiling, unlike a bare
power law which rises without limit.

Read this before using it. The exponent here is a steepness parameter of a
saturating curve, a Hill coefficient. It is the third distinct quantity in the
corpus written with the letter beta. See collisions.

Measured as. Varied: capability C. Read out: alignment A. Held fixed: the
alignment instrument and the capability scale. A_max and Cs are fitted constants
of the curve, not measured quantities.

A alignment

How well the system's behaviour matches what was intended. How it is measured.
Blinded score under an audited consensus protocol, with model-level
self-exclusion, six to seven blinded scores per entry. Domain. bounded above by
A_max where a saturating form is used Units. score, dimensionless once
normalised

C capability

How capable the system is, used where capability rather than recursive depth is
the driving variable. How it is measured. Battery score, as for U. Domain.
positive Units. same as U

A_max the saturation constants

C_s (Cs) the saturation constants

The most alignment a system can reach however capable it becomes, and the
capability at which it is halfway there. How it is measured. Fitted constants of
the saturation curve: the upper asymptote, and the capability at half that
asymptote. Domain. both positive Units. A_max dimensionless; Cs in capability
units

β_H (beta_H) the saturation steepness

How sharply alignment flattens out as it approaches its maximum. A high value
means a sudden knee in the curve; a low value means a gentle bend. How it is
measured. Fitted parameter of the saturation curve EQ-09. Not an exponent of a
power law and not comparable with the other betas. Domain. positive

Status. modelling choice, not derived

Relied upon in: paper-x-coupled-coscaling.

18 Alignment scaling

In words. Alignment grows as a power of recursive depth.

A(R) = A0 * R^beta_A

What it is for. The alignment analogue of EQ-01.

Read this before using it. Fourth distinct beta. See collisions.

Measured as. Varied: recursive depth R. Read out: alignment A. Held fixed: the
alignment instrument, and the starting value A0.

A alignment

Defined in full at EQ-09, its first use.

A₀ (A0) the starting values

Where alignment and error stood before the growth being described began. Every
power law needs a starting point, and this is it. How it is measured. The value
of alignment, and of error, at the first measured point of the series being
fitted. Domain. positive Units. as for the quantity each scales

R recursive depth

Defined in full at EQ-01, its first use.

β_A (beta_A) the alignment-scaling exponent

How alignment grows with recursive depth, as a growth-shape number of its own.
How it is measured. Log-log slope of alignment score against recursive depth.
Domain. real

Status. measured form

Relied upon in: paper-ii-experimental-validation.

19 The self-acceleration exponent

In words. How fast a system's improvement accelerates equals its cost-scaling
exponent minus one over its growth-shape number.

k = delta - 1/alpha

What it is for. Supplies the drift side of EQ-04 from measurable quantities, so
the safety criterion does not need a separate instrument.

Measured as. Not measured directly. It is computed from two measured exponents,
the cost-scaling exponent delta and alpha from EQ-07, so its interval inherits
both of theirs and must be reported with them.

k the drift-acceleration exponent

Defined in full at EQ-04, its first use.

δ (delta) the cost-scaling exponent

How the cost of each further improvement grows as the system gets better. At
zero, every step costs the same. How it is measured. Log-log slope of per-step
cost against capability. Domain. real

α (alpha) the capability-growth exponent

Defined in full at EQ-01, its first use.

Status. derived in Paper XIII; an earlier form k = beta_L - 1 was withdrawn in
full

Relied upon in: paper-xiii-self-acceleration-exponent.

20 The boundary gap

In words. The gap between two systems' shortfalls, expressed as a ratio.

beta_X = (1 - beta_L) / (1 - beta_L_prime)

What it is for. Compares two self-referential systems on one scale.

Read this before using it. Fifth distinct beta, and the only one that is a ratio
rather than an exponent. Paper XIII subscripts it correctly; no other paper
adopted the convention.

Measured as. Not measured directly. It is a ratio of two shortfalls, each
computed from a beta_L measured on its own system through EQ-06, so the two
systems must be measured on the same instrument before the ratio means anything.

β_X (beta_X) the boundary gap

A way of comparing two self-improving systems on one scale, by dividing one
system's shortfall by the other's. How it is measured. Computed from two fitted
couplings through EQ-12. A ratio, not an exponent. Domain. at most one Units.
dimensionless ratio

β_L (beta_L) the self-referential coupling

Defined in full at EQ-05, its first use.

β_L' (beta_L_prime) the comparison coupling

The same self-reference number measured on a second system, so two systems can
be compared rather than one described. How it is measured. The self-referential
coupling of the comparison system in the boundary-gap ratio. Domain. less than
one

Status. derived

Relied upon in: paper-xiii-self-acceleration-exponent.

21 The metabolic analogy

In words. Power per unit mass falls as mass rises, to the power minus one
quarter.

P/M = M^(3/4) / M = M^(-1/4)

What it is for. The biological precedent for a scaling exponent that is argued
for from structure rather than fitted to data. Kleiber's three-quarter exponent
is the observation; the network derivation offered for it by West, Brown and
Enquist is the argument this analogy points at, and it is disputed: a competing
account derives two thirds from surface-to-volume scaling, and the empirical
exponent is not settled between them. What that literature holds and this
programme does not is a mechanism grounded in measured anatomy. The analogy is
used here only to show that a derived exponent is a thing science already has,
and nothing in this programme depends on which exponent wins. Illustrative, not
load-bearing.

Measured as. Not measured by this programme. Mass and metabolic power are
measured in comparative physiology, and the result is carried here as an
illustration; nothing in this programme is fitted to it.

P mass and metabolic power, in the biological analogy

M mass and metabolic power, in the biological analogy

How heavy an organism is, and how much energy it burns. The analogy notes that
bigger animals burn less energy per kilogram, which is a real scaling law from
biology and is used here only as an illustration. How it is measured. Standard
biological notation. This P is metabolic power and is NOT the P of probability
in EQ-19. Domain. positive Units. M in mass; P in power

Status. established result from the literature, cited not claimed

Relied upon in: on-the-origin-of-scaling-laws.

Symbols this register defines that no equation here carries

8 symbols are defined in the notation spine and appear in none of the equations
above. They are set out here rather than attached to an equation, because giving
them a host equation would change what the register claims rather than only how
it renders. Each carries its plain definition, its domain, and where in the
corpus it is used.

γ_N (gamma_N) the residual-decay exponent

How fast the mistakes that are left over disappear as you keep revising. Go
round the loop again and again, and this number says how quickly what remains
shrinks. Higher means the leftovers vanish faster. How it is measured. The slope
of residual error against revision count at fixed capability: residual error
after N revisions falls as N to the power minus this exponent. Fitted by the
depth studies. It appears in no equation in this register, and it has never been
measured on any real system. Domain. positive; no upper bound is claimed What
this rests on. The programme's working premise treats this exponent as the same
quantity as the correction-leverage exponent, under an assumption that
internally accumulated corrections combine like independent samples. That
identification is a registered question, not a settled fact, and no result
depends on it being true.

γ_D (gamma_D) the capability-to-depth conversion exponent

How readily raw ability turns into more rounds of self-improvement. If a system
gets cleverer, does it also get faster at improving itself, and by how much. How
it is measured. The exponent by which revision depth accelerates with
capability: the rate of change of depth grows as capability to the power of this
exponent. Not measured by any registered study. Domain. positive What this rests
on. This exponent carries its own finite-time ceiling, one divided by it, and
that is a DIFFERENT law from the ceiling law EQ-03. The two agree at exactly one
half and nowhere else, which is why the form 1/gamma can look correct beside a
value of two. Any sentence pairing this exponent's number with EQ-03's formula
is false everywhere except that single point.

Δ (Delta_balance) the balance exponent

Whether correction is pulling ahead of the work it has to do, read along the
path a system actually took. Positive means the gap is closing. How it is
measured. The difference of two log-derivatives taken along an observed path:
phi_Q minus phi_W. Directly estimable from the path alone; its components are
not. Introduced in the author-review working paper of 16 August 2026. Domain.
any real number Where it is used. the balance model; positive means correction
is gaining on burden

φ_Q (phi_Q) the correction-service path elasticity

How fast the correction a system can actually deliver grows as it goes deeper,
measured along the path it took. How it is measured. d log Q / d log r along the
observed path, where Q is delivered correction service. Equals alpha_C times chi
plus eta when the path is decomposed, but is estimable without that
decomposition. Domain. any real number Where it is used. the balance exponent

φ_W (phi_W) the burden path elasticity

How fast the correctable work a system generates grows as it goes deeper,
measured along the path it took. How it is measured. d log W / d log r along the
observed path, where W is newly generated correctable burden. Equals alpha_C
times kappa plus zeta when decomposed, but is estimable without that
decomposition. Domain. any real number Where it is used. the balance exponent

κ (kappa) the burden intensity elasticity

How much more correctable work each unit of new capability brings with it, as
the system gets more capable. How it is measured. The elasticity of newly
generated burden with respect to capability. The registration's burden model is
the case kappa equals one; the burden-intensity rival is kappa above one,
written elsewhere as one plus mu_B. Domain. non-negative Where it is used. the
general ceiling; the burden-intensity rival

η (eta) the direct depth-dependence of correction service

Whether correction gets better simply by being run more times, apart from any
gain in capability. How it is measured. The direct exponent of recursive depth
in correction service, holding capability fixed. Zero in the registration's
model. Embedded correction is the claim that this is larger than it is for
correction applied from outside. Domain. any real number Where it is used. the
general ceiling; the embedded-correction claim

ζ (zeta) the direct depth-dependence of burden

Whether going deeper generates correctable work by itself, apart from the
capability it produces. How it is measured. The direct exponent of recursive
depth in newly generated burden, holding capability fixed. Minus one in the
registration's model, which is what it means for burden to follow the rate of
capability gain rather than its level. Domain. any real number Where it is used.
the general ceiling

Where one letter means two things

A symbol that carries two meanings is the failure this page exists to prevent.
Both readings are named; neither is quietly dropped.

gamma: 3 distinct quantities

- gamma the correction-leverage exponent, also called the correction-capacity
  exponent; the one in the ceiling law. Written chi from the working paper of 16
  August 2026 onward, which is the name to use in any new writing; the
  registration still says gamma and the two are the same quantity (EQ-03)

- gamma_N the residual-decay exponent, how fast leftover error falls with
  revision count at fixed capability (the depth studies; no equation in this
  register)

- gamma_D the capability-to-depth conversion exponent, whose own finite-time
  ceiling is one divided by it (no equation in this register)

Why it matters. This is the collision with the worst history in the programme.
The form alpha_crit = 1/gamma was retracted on 16 August 2026 for the
correction-leverage reading, where it runs backwards. The SAME form is correct
algebra for the conversion reading, because a different dynamical system sits
underneath it. The two ceilings agree at exactly one half, which is the
programme's headline number, so a wrong pairing survives casual review. Anyone
writing gamma without saying which of the three they mean can produce a sentence
that is true under one reading, retracted under another, and unfalsifiable as
written. Say which one, every time. One further reading exists and it is a
rename rather than a fourth quantity: the ceiling-law reading is written chi
from 16 August 2026, because gamma could no longer be written safely. The chi
entry says so; this entry now says it too, so the pointer runs both ways and a
reader meeting either symbol finds the other.

Resolution. Write the full name in prose on first use in any document, and use a
subscript only alongside it. The bare letter gamma is reserved for the
correction-leverage exponent of EQ-03 and means nothing else.

beta: 5 distinct quantities

- beta_C correction exponent, Law II, compared against k (EQ-04)

- beta_L self-referential coupling, Foundational Theorem 2, giving alpha =
  1/(1-beta_L) (EQ-05, EQ-06)

- beta_H saturation steepness, a Hill coefficient (EQ-09)

- beta_A alignment-scaling exponent (EQ-10)

- beta_X boundary gap, a ratio of shortfalls (EQ-12)

Why it matters. A reader or a machine that conflates beta_C with beta_L gets the
safety criterion exactly backwards, because one is a correction rate compared
against drift and the other is a coupling that feeds a reciprocal. Paper X uses
a bare beta for two different quantities within one paper.

Resolution. This file subscripts all five. The corpus has not yet adopted the
subscripts outside Paper XIII, which introduced them independently and
correctly. Propagation across the papers is outstanding, and it belongs to the
papers rather than to this register: this file records the convention, and each
paper adopts it at its next version.

alpha in the error-decay equation: 2 distinct quantities

- alpha the capability-growth exponent (EQ-08 as written in some papers)

- alpha_align an alignment-specific decay exponent (EQ-08 as written in others)

Why it matters. If these are the same quantity, one symbol should be used. If
they are different, the difference has never been stated anywhere in the corpus.

Resolution. Unresolved. Flagged for the papers to settle, not settled here,
because settling it is a scientific judgement and this file records judgements
rather than making them.

d: 3 distinct quantities

- d effective spatial dimension, in alpha = d/(d+1) and supplied by the
  equation-of-state relation d = 2/(1+3w); one quantity across two equations,
  not two (EQ-13)

- d (Cohen) Cohen's d, a standardised effect size, reported as d = -0.53; a
  statistic about a comparison, carrying no relation to dimension (results
  reported across seven papers)

- d(t) the misalignment fraction, defined as D/C, how much of a system's
  capability is misaligned; a bounded ratio that evolves in time (Paper X)

Why it matters. A reader meeting d in a results table and d in the dimensional
derivation is meeting two unrelated quantities, and d(t) in Paper X is a third.
Cohen's d is standard notation nobody should change, which makes the collision
permanent rather than fixable: the answer is to subscript the programme's own
uses, never the statistic.

Resolution. Unresolved in the corpus. This file records all three. The
dimensional d and the misalignment fraction d(t) should carry distinguishing
marks in the papers; Cohen's d must be left exactly as it is, because it belongs
to the discipline rather than to this programme.

A: 2 distinct quantities

- A alignment, the degree to which behaviour matches intent (EQ-09, EQ-10)

- A_c correction capacity, how much correcting a system can do, the denominator
  of the burden ratio (EQ-15)

Why it matters. The burden-to-capacity ratio is the derivation the ceiling comes
from, so confusing its denominator with alignment misreads the origin of the
value two.

Resolution. Subscripted as A_c in this file. Introduced here rather than
inherited: the papers write a bare A. Recorded as a collision this register
CREATED by naming a quantity that had none, rather than one it found, because
reusing the bare letter while auditing letter reuse would have been the same
mistake in a new place.

P: 2 distinct quantities

- P probability, in Bayes' theorem (EQ-19)

- P metabolic power, in the biological scaling analogy (EQ-14)

Why it matters. The two are unrelated and sit in equations of different kinds,
one statistical and one illustrative. The risk is low but a reader meeting P for
the first time in EQ-14 will carry the wrong meaning into EQ-19.

Resolution. Read P as probability everywhere except the metabolic analogy, which
says so in words.

delta and Delta: 3 distinct quantities

- delta (cost) the cost-scaling exponent (this register)

- delta_obs (direct-bound unit) observed correction pressure, alpha times one
  minus the correction elasticity, minus one; POSITIVE when burden outruns
  correction (the direct-bound draft's H2)

- Delta (balance) phi_Q minus phi_W; POSITIVE when correction gains on burden
  (the balance model of 16 August 2026)

Why it matters. The two pressure quantities carry OPPOSITE sign conventions and
are equal in magnitude at the registered dials: Delta equals minus delta_obs
there. A reader who meets both and assumes one convention reads a stability
verdict backwards. Always name which is meant.

Resolution. Name the quantity, never the letter. Bare delta is the cost-scaling
exponent and nothing else. The direct-bound unit's pressure reading is written
delta_obs in full and is POSITIVE when burden outruns correction; the balance
model's reading is written Delta in full and is POSITIVE when correction gains
on burden. Because the two are equal in magnitude and opposite in sign at the
registered dials, a sign quoted without its symbol's full name decides a
stability verdict the wrong way round, so neither may be quoted bare, and any
passage carrying both states the convention it is using in the same sentence.

E: 2 distinct quantities

- E error, how wrong the system is (EQ-07, EQ-08, EQ-18)

- E (Bayes) evidence, the observation being conditioned on (EQ-19)

Why it matters. E is defined as error five sections before it appears as
evidence, so a reader carrying this file's own definition into Bayes' theorem
reads the probability of a hypothesis given an error.

Resolution. Read E as error everywhere except inside Bayes' theorem, which is
standard statistical notation and must not be renamed.

k: 2 distinct quantities

- k the drift-acceleration exponent, compared against beta_C (EQ-04, EQ-11)

- k (Fisher) the number of pooled p-values, setting the degrees of freedom
  (EQ-21)

Why it matters. 2k degrees of freedom is a count, not an exponent, and the
exponent reading is the one this file defines first.

Resolution. The bare k is the drift-acceleration exponent; Fisher's k is written
in words as the number of studies pooled.

Forms that were withdrawn

Kept on the record rather than deleted. A programme that removes its own
retractions loses the thing that made the correction honest.

alpha_crit = 1 / gamma

Replaced by alpha_crit = 1 / (1 - gamma), 2026-08-16.

Why it was wrong. It runs backwards under the programme's own definition of
gamma: it makes a better corrector lower the ceiling. Under the same-class cap
gamma at most one half it returns a ceiling of AT LEAST two, which inverts a
bound into a floor.

Why it went unnoticed. The two forms return the same answer, two, at exactly
gamma = one half, which is the programme's headline number. Agreement at the one
point anybody checks.

Legitimate where: Inside a correction note, a version history, or a unit whose
subject is discriminating the two forms. ALSO legitimate, and this is the
exception that caused the confusion, as the finite-time ceiling of the
capability-to-depth CONVERSION exponent gamma_D, which is a different quantity
obeying a different law. When used that way it must be written with the
conversion symbol and never with a bare gamma, because the retraction governs
the correction-leverage reading absolutely..

k = beta_L - 1

Replaced by k = delta - 1/alpha, withdrawn in full in an earlier draft of Paper
XIII.

Why it was wrong. Recorded as withdrawn in the paper itself; the replacement
derives k from cost scaling rather than from the coupling.

Legitimate where: inside Paper XIII's own withdrawal note.

alpha = 2.24 as a measured value

Replaced by alpha = 0.49, interval [-1.3, 2.9], which distinguishes nothing,
after cross-architecture replication failure.

Why it was wrong. It did not replicate across architectures.

Legitimate where: only ever as retracted; the bare figure is banned on every
surface.

alpha_max

Replaced by alpha_crit, 2026-08-30.

Why it was wrong. The ceiling is a crossover on stability, not a maximum: a
system can exceed it and cannot stay correctable there. alpha_max reads as an
impossibility limit, which the stability framing forbids, and it named the same
quantity as alpha_crit under a second symbol, so the glossary and the
founding-paper drafts carried the law under two names.

Why it went unnoticed. Both symbols sat beside the same formula, 1/(1 - gamma),
so a reader never met the two at once and every surface hand-wrote whichever it
had seen last.

Legitimate where: inside a correction note, a version history, or a passage
discriminating the two symbols.

Law III, the ARC Bound

Replaced by Law III, the ARC Ceiling, 2026-08-30.

Why it was wrong. The ARC Bound (alpha <= 2) is the value the ARC Ceiling
returns at gamma = 1/2, not the law; naming the instance as the law hides the
assumption the value rests on.

Legitimate where: inside a dated correction row or version note; as printed in
the DOI-frozen papers, which carry the canonical name in their placement notes.

Law III, the Ceiling

Replaced by Law III, the ARC Ceiling, 2026-08-30.

Why it was wrong. The programme prefix is part of the law's name; the bare word
is a description, and a description can attach to any ceiling.

Legitimate where: inside a dated correction row or version note; as printed in
the DOI-frozen papers.

the Co-Scaling Law

Replaced by the ARC Co-Scaling Law, 2026-08-30.

Why it was wrong. Law II's name carries the programme prefix like the other two;
the bare form drifted onto surfaces written from memory.

Legitimate where: inside a dated correction row; as printed in the DOI-frozen
papers, whose placement notes carry the canonical name.

What is still open

- Is the exponent in the error-decay equation the same alpha as the
  capability-growth exponent, or a distinct alignment-specific one? Never
  stated.

- The independence premise behind gamma = one half is undefended. It is the
  single assumption holding up the value two, and it is deliberately left open.

- EQ-05 supplies an unexploited falsifier: measure beta_L independently, predict
  alpha, compare against the fitted alpha. No unit currently does this.

- Cohen's d and the programme's dimensional d share a letter and cannot both be
  renamed, because one belongs to statistics rather than to this programme.
  Which of the programme's own uses takes a subscript is an open decision.

- Does build order actually change the corrector's class enough to move the
  leverage exponent? The argument says order is a lever; whether pulling it
  separates the classes in practice is unmeasured, and it is the cheapest
  decisive study the programme has specified.

Version history

Version 1.9.0 (4 October 2026): published as a paper in every format, with its
own DOI on OSF and its own reference card, under the title Operational
Definitions of the ARC Theory (until this version, Operational Definitions of
the ARC Programme). The note on what the word law is doing counts the theory's
five laws and their status, and the description and the abstract say where the
notation of Laws IV and V is fixed. No equation, symbol, collision or retracted
form changes.

Version 1.8.0 (7 September 2026): thirty-three of the fifty-one individual
symbol names printed in these equations had no rendered definition block,
because the renderer looked names up in a dictionary keyed by the spine's full
composite strings and silently dropped anything it did not find, because six
equations did not name in symbols_used the symbols their own statement prints,
and because eight symbols appear in no equation at all. Every symbol's domain
and units were carried in this file and rendered nowhere. The lookup now fails
loudly, the composite keys resolve member by member, the orphans have a
standalone section, the domain and units render, and the gate tests for a
rendered definition block rather than for a name occurring somewhere on the
page, which 46 of the 51 already did. It supersedes 1.7.2 (sha256
0ae774690effd36e9c19eafee863300dfce38ca2f2687ffaae20a969923af927), not 1.7.1.
1.7.2 (2026-09-04): the delta family was declared a collision with readings, a
severity and a why-it-matters and no resolution key, so
build-operationalisation.py raised KeyError('resolution') and the production
chain died on it. The resolution now names the quantity rather than the letter:
bare delta is the cost-scaling exponent and nothing else, the direct-bound
unit's pressure reading is written delta_obs in full and is positive when burden
outruns correction, the balance model's reading is written Delta in full and is
positive when correction gains on burden, and because the two are equal in
magnitude and opposite in sign at the registered dials neither may be quoted
bare. One field was added to one collision in commit 68bbb55f91; no equation,
symbol, definition or count changed, and the register still carried 21
equations, 38 symbols, 7 collisions, 7 retracted forms and 5 open questions
after it as before. Those bytes hash to sha256
0ae774690effd36e9c19eafee863300dfce38ca2f2687ffaae20a969923af927 and stood under
the number 1.7.1 from 4 September 2026 until the 1.8.0 bump. They are given
their own number here, in the record and not by editing them, so that 1.7.1
names one set of bytes and one only: 1.7.1 (2026-09-03) is the deposited state,
sha256 68891fa12cf3ee4a58d1a7d278aecdd9ed170366339e36cc7ab478027bbbeb48, which
the theory registration's companion extract of 3 September 2026 cites and which
nothing in this record changes. 1.7.0 (2026-09-03): the gamma collision, which
is the register's worst, pointed one way only. The chi entry recorded that it is
the registration's gamma; the gamma entry did not record that the quantity is
now written chi, so a reader arriving at the collision was not told the current
name existed. 1.6.0 (2026-08-27): worked example ran a bounded percentage
through unbounded arithmetic; recast on the ladder-scale latent measure with the
three model families stated (27 August 2026); then, 30 August 2026, the law
labels were aligned with the home declaration (Law II is the ARC Co-Scaling Law;
Law III is the ARC Ceiling, of which the ARC Bound is the same-class instance)
and alpha_max was retired as a second symbol for alpha_crit

First published on 22 August 2026; versions 1.5.0 (24 August), 1.6.0 to 1.6.2
(27 to 30 August) and 1.7.0 to 1.7.1 (3 September) built and corrected the
spine, each dated by its commit.

Key findings (quotable)
-----------------------
- This document fixes what each symbol in the ARC Theory's equations means and how it would be measured.
- It ranks the twenty-one equations the programme relies upon for Laws I to III by how much depends on each, from the ARC Equation of Law I, U = I x R^alpha, through Law II's criterion, beta_C > k, and Law III's ceiling, alpha_crit = 1 / (1 - gamma), to the statistical methods the experiments use.
- It defines thirty-eight symbols in plain words, pairs each with the measurement that would produce it, names the nine letters the corpus uses for more than one quantity, and records the seven forms the programme has retracted, with the reason each was wrong.
- It reports no result and asserts no value: every figure it quotes is carried from the paper that measured it.

Citation
--------
Michael Darius Eastwood (2026). Operational Definitions of the ARC Theory |
Michael Darius Eastwood. OSF DOI 10.17605/OSF.IO/GVQ82.
https://www.michaeldariuseastwood.com/research/papers/operational-definitions.html

Notes
-----
Every equation the programme relies upon for Laws I to III of the ARC Theory,
ranked by how much depends on it, with every symbol defined in plain words and
paired with the measurement that would produce it; the notation of Laws IV and V
is fixed in section 1 of their mathematics, version 1.0 (3 October 2026), until
it joins this document. The source of truth for notation across the papers, the
preregistrations and the website. It reports no result and asserts no value:
every figure quoted here is carried from the paper that measured it, and that
paper governs. Where this document and a paper disagree about what a symbol
means, this document governs; where they disagree about what a number is, the
paper does.

Provenance note
---------------
Michael Darius Eastwood conceived and directs this research programme and is the
author of this work. Across the programme, he has used more than six AI systems
in parallel, under his own instructions, to stress-test his arguments, identify
possible errors, and assist in preparing draft text from his own outlines. He
determines what is adopted, revised or rejected and takes responsibility for the
published content. These systems are tools, not authors.

Generated from master
---------------------
master_path: research/papers/operational-definitions.html
master_sha256: 837c4c92a4f3682ecaf0737c75306bc000b49215a4b39f2f1344e1418a357c0f
builder: scripts/build-paper-companions.py

This block records the SHA-256 of the HTML master that produced this .txt. A
check tool re-hashing master_path can decide freshness without any external
state. If the master's current SHA-256 does not match master_sha256, this file
is stale and must not be published: regenerate first with `python3
scripts/build-paper-companions.py --slug operational-definitions`.
